## CS-499 Computer Science Capstone Final Project

### Self-Assessment

#### Reflection
<p>The coursework throughout the Southern New Hampshire Computer Science program has helped shape many of my current professional goals. When I first entered the program, I had the goal to develop desktop computer applications. During the program, I learned about modern web-based APIs and Software-as-a-Service designs. I believe these design implementations allow for programs to be developed to reach a wider audience of people. Other benefits to the web-based models is the rapid development and updates than can be implemented.</p>
<p>Throughout the course and reflected in my final project, is that I can design and implement a program from the beginning of the process to the end. This capstone project has envisioned a past project from an early course to a usable program at completion. This project has also shown that I can take an unfamiliar set of tools (Spring Boot) and implement a working design. Before this project, my framework of choice was Flask for Python. This final project also inspired me to start looking into front end development techniques. The project works with curl and postman as an API but implementing a website and form data would make it much more user friendly and interactive. Though I am done with the project for my capstone, it will allow me to continue to grow and learn as I continue to implement new features.</p>
#### Team Collaboration
<p>Throughout the program, I had to constantly consider aspects such as clean and readable code, in-line comments, and documentation. CS-310, Collaboration and Team Project, used Bitbucket and Git to develop and work on a group project. This course involved merge conflict resolution, and other problems from development on a large team, to ensure that the final project was completed. In my Client/Server Development course, the comments included in the code and provided documentation showed how to use curl commands to properly execute the program. In the final project, I allowed for easier team collaboration by ensuring that code implementation for the different Java classes was consistent throughout.</p>
#### Communication
<p>Early in the program, I took an English composition course. This course focused on persuasive writing techniques. This helped through the rest of my degree as I was then able to develop communications to best support or argue for a particular implementation throughout the course. IT-210, Business Systems Analysis and Design – Demonstrated ways to take client requirements and develop a business plan including technology requirements and solutions, potential security risks and mitigations, and how competitors are approaching the same space. In the Software Development Life Cycle (CS-250) course, I explored aspects of communication and documentation while developing within the stages of an Agile environment. This course also had me go through the various roles typical of an Agile development team, including scrum master, product owner, tester, and developer.</p>
#### Data Structures and Algorithms
<p>CS-260, Data Structures and Algorithms, best exemplified the use of data structures and algorithms in my course. It covered common data structures such as Linked Lists, Vectors, Hash Tables and Binary Search Trees. For algorithms, it covered sorts (including selection sort and quick sort), binary tree traversals, and searching.</p>
<p>The needs for my final project were much simpler. I was able to handle most of my data using pagination using the provided repository classes from the Java Spring Boot Data JPA. This allowed me to paginate data and return a subset of results instead of the entirety of database information, slowing down potential client connection.</p>
#### Software Design and Engineering
<p>A majority of courses taken throughout the program covered software engineering and design. Foundations in Application Development (IT-145) covered writing logical, structured code introducing object-oriented design. Additionally, it emphasized writing, reviewing, and documenting applications using Java. CS-250, Software Development Life Cycle included writing user stories and planned test cases for the course. Object Oriented Analysis and Design (IT-315) covered project planning with the use of the Unified Modeling Language (UML). It included concepts like sequence diagrams, use cases, CRC cards and more. Software testing, automation, and quality assurance (CS-320) covered concepts in testing. These included requirements analysis and quality management. In this course, we utilized unit testing, test harnesses, and test runners to find bugs and implement fixes within the program. Lastly, CS-340 Client/Server Development, focused on connecting client-side code using the Python framework Bottle to a database backend using MongoDB.</p>
<p>In my final project, I took the planned project from IT-315 and implemented a client/server program using Spring Boot and MySQL. This was an involved process as I had to go back through the old project and redo parts that were less informed at the time to make a functional program.</p>
#### Databases
<p>The three courses I’ve taken focusing on databases were Introduction to SQL, Oracle SQL Fundamentals, and Client/Server Development. Introduction to SQL introduced MySQL and CS-340 used MongoDB for the backend. These courses have shown me three different implementations for backend management. Developing in both MongoDB and MySQL have shown me the differences and the strengths of each choice when considering the program design.</p>
#### Security
<p>Secure coding (CS-405) was an elective course I took that focused on common security vulnerabilities and how to mitigate these bugs. This course demonstrated the use of static analysis tools in identifying these vulnerabilities.</p>
<p>In my capstone project, I tried to implement authentication for enrollment staff versus students. While I was able to implement the login requirements for the enrollment staff, allowing them to use each aspect of the design, I was unable to design a more restrictive set for students in time. While failing to implement everything I wanted to, it is secured by requiring a username and password before data can be retrieved. Additionally, using the provided and established Java Spring Boot framework following modern best practices will reduce the chances of security vulnerabilities.</p>
#### Summary
<p>The following narratives show how these separate entities are all needed to create a moderately scaled project. Knowledge of software design, databases, and data structures and algorithms are all needed to develop a usable end product. In each of these narratives, I discuss one of these aspects and flesh out on the ideas I had before and during the implantation.</p>


### The Code Review
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Aj5iu-LbCfo" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Software Design and Engineering

<p>The artifact I chose for the Software Design and Engineering component of this course was the college course and registration program from IT-315, Object Oriented Analysis and Design, to design as a REST API (similar to the one from CS-340, Client/Server Development).</p>
<p>I included this artifact in my portfolio because it shows my ability to plan and implement a program. I also implemented it in Java Spring Boot to demonstrate that I could learn and utilize different development stacks. Thus far, I’ve incorporated the web api handling of the project. Next module, I will have introduced the MySQL database back end. This will allow me to appropriately incorporate the services. Currently, my service handling uses hard coded lists from a temporary class in the program. Implement MySQL will allow me to better store this information in a database. It will also allow me to improve and add additional enhancements in the future (such as returning a student’s class schedule).</p>
<p>I believe my initial development in this project touches upon three of the course objectives. I’ve shown I can use different techniques, skills, and tools to accomplish goals. For instance, my original REST API from CS-340 used Python and the Bottle web framework. This project is utilizing Java and the Spring Boot web framework. Additionally, I’ve met the objective of designing, developing, and delivering coherent and technically sound communications. Lastly, I’ve begun to touch on many of the security aspects of design. I’ve followed better design practices to ensure no warnings or errors remain in the code. And all imports are for needed components, rather than the poor practice of wildcard imports.</p>
<p>In programming this artifact, I’ve realized that implementing authentication and authorization methods were things I have not touched on much throughout my degree. This has been the largest challenge so far and I’ve yet to complete its incorporation into my project. Another aspect I feel I’ve fell short on is much of the error handling thus far. This will change as I start to fully flesh out the database service section.</p>


### Algorithms and Data Structures

<p>I selected this artifact to improve because I thought it would best demonstrate algorithm design and data structure choice. The major improvement from the original artifact to know is pagination. Instead of returning each row of data, it returns a limited selection instead. This reduces the load for the user by loading smaller amounts of data instead.
In improving this portion of the artifact, I showed that I can design a computing solution to solve a given problem using algorithmic principles while managing trade-offs in design choices.</p>
<p>While implementing the pagination, I learned that there were multiple different ways to paginate from a database, like Keyset or Seek (Gilling, 2019). Because I haven’t implemented the database yet, I faced a few challenges while implementing it with my example development data. An example of this includes have limits or offsets that were to large. This would cause errors as I was trying to get data outside of the bounds of the array. This was worth learning, as I know how to handle it now if MySQL has similar limitations.</p>

<p>
Reference<br />
Gilling, D. (2019, April 23). Rest api design: Filtering, sorting, and pagination. Retrieved from https://www.moesif.com/blog/technical/api-design/REST-API-Design-Filtering-Sorting-and-Pagination/
</p>

### Database

<p>I selected this artifact to improve because I thought it would best demonstrate algorithm design and data structure choice. The major improvement from the original artifact to know is pagination. Instead of returning each row of data, it returns a limited selection instead. This reduces the load for the user by loading smaller amounts of data instead.</p>
<p>In improving this portion of the artifact, I showed that I can design a computing solution to solve a given problem using algorithmic principles while managing trade-offs in design choices.</p>
<p>While implementing the pagination, I learned that there were multiple different ways to paginate from a database, like Keyset or Seek (Gilling, 2019). Because I haven’t implemented the database yet, I faced a few challenges while implementing it with my example development data. An example of this includes have limits or offsets that were to large. This would cause errors as I was trying to get data outside of the bounds of the array. This was worth learning, as I know how to handle it now if MySQL has similar limitations.</p>

